---
title: Compiling Erlang for Synology DS211, DSM 5.1
date: 2015-07-05 20:16+0100
---

I wanted to get Erlang running on my Synology NAS, for various reasons, and was
struggling with the cross compiler.

Fortunately, I found the **SynoCommunity**
[website](https://synocommunity.com/), and more specifically, the [github
repository](https://github.com/SynoCommunity/spksrc) for the same.

The instructions there state:

> it is recommended to use a virtual machine with an x86, 32-bit version of
> Debian stable

So, using vagrant, I fired up a 32-bit Debian "Wheezy" VM. Why wheezy? Because
I had problems building the native Erlang on anything newer.

    host$ mkdir syno
    host$ cd syno

    host$ vagrant init puppetlabs/debian-7.8-32-nocm
    host$ vagrant up
    host$ vagrant ssh

Inside the VM:

    vagrant$ sudo apt-get -y update
    vagrant$ sudo apt-get -y upgrade
    vagrant$ sudo apt-get -y install build-essential git ncurses-dev libssl-dev

    vagrant$ git clone https://github.com/SynoCommunity/spksrc.git
    vagrant$ cd spksrc/
    vagrant$ make setup

    vagrant$ pushd native/erlang/
    vagrant$ make
    vagrant$ popd

    vagrant$ pushd cross/erlang/
    vagrant$ make arch-88f6281

    vagrant$ cd work-88f6281-5.1/install
    vagrant$ tar cfz /vagrant/erlang-R16B03-1-88f6281-5.1.tar.gz .

OK, we now have an Erlang tarball. Copy it onto the DiskStation:

    host$ scp erlang-R16B03-1-88f6281-5.1.tar.gz root@diskstation:/

and unpack it:

    DiskStation> cd /
    DiskStation> tar xfz erlang-R16B03-1-88f6281-5.1.tar.gz
    DiskStation> erl
    Erlang R16B03-1 (erts-5.10.4) [source] [async-threads:10] [kernel-poll:false]

    Eshell V5.10.4  (abort with ^G)
    1>

Done. One copy of Erlang R16B03-1 running on my Synology NAS box.
