---
title: Validating RS256-signed JSON Web Tokens in Erlang
date: 2015-04-19 14:29:00Z
---

I'm currently playing with OpenID Connect (OAuth 2.0 for Login), to allow
people to log into a web site using their Google account. The web site is built
using Erlang.

By following the [Google
documentation](https://developers.google.com/identity/protocols/OpenIDConnect),
I've managed to send an authentication request to Google, exchange the code
returned for an ID token, and extract the user information from the ID token.

The documentation says:

> since you are communicating directly with Google over an intermediary-free
> HTTPS channel and using your client secret to authenticate yourself to
> Google, you can be confident that the token you receive really comes from
> Google and is valid.

However, I wanted to deal with the token validation as well. Sample code for
C#, Java, Ruby etc. exists, but I couldn't find anything for Erlang, so...

## ID Token

If you use Google OpenID Connect, you get back an `id_token` that looks
something like `eyJh`...`MifQ.eyJp`...`MzR9.rG-s`...`btCc`.

This is a [JSON Web Token (JWT)](see http://jwt.io/).

It's in three parts (header, payload and signature), separated by dots. Each
part is base64url-encoded. Erlang doesn't have a built-in base64url module, so
you'll have to [find one](https://github.com/dvv/base64url).

    [H, P, S] = binary:split(Token, <<".">>, [global]).
    Header = jiffy:decode(base64url:decode(H), [return_maps]).
    Payload = jiffy:decode(base64url:decode(P), [return_maps]).
    Signature = base64url:decode(S).

## Key ID

The header is JSON, and looks something like this:

    {
      "alg": "RS256",
      "kid": "8faca3e0eff37d416d0a8a9770d8f09c7eeffce3"
    }

The signing algorithm is given is given in the header as `RS256`, which is "RSA
using SHA-256 hash algorithm". The particular certificate to be used is
specified by the `kid` field.

    #{<<"kid">> := KId} = Header.

## Google's OpenID Configuration

To find Google's JWT signing certificates, we first need to get the Discovery document for Google's OpenID Connect service, which is at `https://accounts.google.com/.well-known/openid-configuration`:

    {ok, _} = application:ensure_all_started(inets).
    {ok, _} = application:ensure_all_started(ssl).

    ConfigurationUrl =
        "https://accounts.google.com/.well-known/openid-configuration".
    {ok, { {_, 200, _}, _, ConfigurationJson}} =
        httpc:request(ConfigurationUrl).
    Configuration = jiffy:decode(ConfigurationJson, [return_maps]).

## Google Signing Keys

The discovery document contains a field `jwks_uri` which points to the JWT signing keys:

    #{<<"jwks_uri">> := JwksUri} = Configuration.

And we can go and get that document:

    {ok, { {_, 200, _}, _, JwksJson}} =
        httpc:request(binary_to_list(JwksUri)).

This returns a JSON object that looks like the following:

    {
      "keys": [
        {
          "kty": "RSA", "alg": "RS256", "use": "sig",
          "kid": "8faca3e0eff37d416d0a8a9770d8f09c7eeffce3",
          "n": "xJiA...5Kik", "e": "AQAB"
        },

        ...
      ]
    }

The real document has more than one key in it. You should look up the entry
where the `kid` field matches the one specified in the token.

According to the Google documentation, we should cache this document. The
`Cache-Control` and `Expires` HTTP headers appear to be set appropriately for
this.

    Jwks = jiffy:decode(JwksJson, [return_maps]).
    #{<<"keys">> := Keys} = Jwks.
    [Key] = lists:filter(
                fun(Key) ->
                    #{<<"kid">> := K} = Key,
                    K =:= KId
                end, Keys).

## Public Key Modulus and Exponent

We need the public key modulus and exponent, which are `n` and `e`
respectively. They're base64url-encoded, and we want them as integers, so:

    #{<<"n">> := N0, <<"e">> := E0} = Key.
    N1 = base64url:decode(N0).
    E1 = base64url:decode(E0).
    N = binary:decode_unsigned(N1).
    E = binary:decode_unsigned(E1).

## Validating the signature

    Msg = iolist_to_binary([H, <<".">>, P]),
    IsValid = crypto:verify(rsa, sha256, Msg, Signature, [E, N]).

## Done?

Not quite. The [documentation](https://developers.google.com/identity/protocols/OpenIDConnect#validatinganidtoken) requires 5 steps:

1. Verify that the ID token is a JWT which is properly signed with an
   appropriate Google public key.
2. Verify that the value of aud in the ID token is equal to your app’s client
   ID.
3. Verify that the value of iss in the ID token is equal to accounts.google.com
   or https://accounts.google.com.
4. Verify that the expiry time (exp) of the ID token has not passed.
5. If you passed a hd parameter in the request, verify that the ID token has a
   hd claim that matches your Google Apps hosted domain.

We've only done the first step, but it is the hardest. The others are left as an
exercise for the reader.
