---
title: "Synology SRM DNS Server problems"
date: 2021-12-19T12:11:00Z
tags: dns synology-srm
---

While messing around with my [k3s cluster](/tag/k3s/), I decided that I needed a DNS server. I tried the Synology DNS Server.

That is: in order for addresses like `docker.k3s.differentpla.net` to work, I need a DNS resolver, and it needs to be
one that the rest of my home network can use. So I installed the DNS Server package on my Synology router. This is the
default DNS server for everything, so adding a new zone to it should be an easy way to get everything talking.

This morning, I couldn't ssh from my Windows laptop into the k3s controller. Initially I blamed WSL,
but -- as usual -- it's always DNS.

Overnight, the cached addresses had hit their TTL and expired, meaning that my laptop went back to the DNS
server. This returned NXDOMAIN.

## What broke?

Before installing the DNS server, Synology SRM uses `dnsmasq` for both DHCP and DNS, meaning that host names
are implicitly registered in DNS whenever they request a DHCP lease.

After installing the DNS server, SRM uses `named` (i.e. BIND) for DNS, and host names are _not_ implicitly
registered in DNS.

I fixed it by uninstalling the DNS Server package, and things were back to normal more or less instantly.
It still leaves me with the original problem: publishing k3s services in DNS.

## Options

After briefly scratching my head, I've identified a number of options:

- I was expecting dynamic DNS updates to happen.
  - Can I persuade dnsmasq to tell the DNS server about DHCP clients?
    - This is my preferred option, but I can't find a setting for it.
  - Can I persuade the clients to tell the DNS server themselves?
    - There's a dnsmasq option, `--dhcp-client-update` which is off by default.
    - Can I enable it in SRM? It's not in the GUI, but editing the config file would probably work.
- Similarly, can I let dnsmasq continue to think it's the primary for the "home" zone, and set up BIND as the secondary?
  - Seems a bit ... fragile, but maybe it would be fine.
- dnsmasq has the `--addn-hosts=<file>` option. I could probably use that to add the extra hosts.
  - I'd need to add them manually, but I guess I'd need to do that anyway.
- dnsmasq has the `--server=/<domain>/<server>#<port>` option, which allows you to specify a DNS server for specific domains.
  - I could use that to point `.k3s.differentpla.net` queries to an alternate DNS server.
  - If I wanted to use Synology's DNS server, I could install it elsewhere (e.g. on my DS211 which is already connected to
    the cluster) and use it with this setting.
  - Maybe I can register services in CoreDNS, and use it with that?

For now, I think I'll use the `--addn-hosts=<file>` setting. I might investigate CoreDNS at some point.

<div class="callout callout-info" markdown="span">
I opted to use CoreDNS. See [this page]({% post_url 2021/2021-12-29-coredns %}).
</div>
